Information for Empowerment of Citizens: Our guiding principle to move South Africa Forward Statement by the Minister of Communications Ms Faith Muthambi MP, at the Cluster Media Briefing, Cape Town 24 June 2014A warm greeting to members of the media and the diplomatic community gathered here. As part of transparency in our governance system we are once again organizing all the ministers in their numerous clusters to address through yourselves, members of the media to give more details to the State of the Nation address as well as give a glimpse into some of the highlights of the programme of action of government.The detail of the programme of action will appear in the budget votes that are planned to take place over the next few weeks. For colleagues whose ministries are either new or reconfigured or for those who have moved to new portfolios the last few weeks have seen us familiarising ourselves with the new responsibilities in order to be able to face the public through their democratically elected representatives about how we intend moving South Africa forward. We look forward to this engagement hoping that it will be a constructive one that will lay a basis of how we want to relate with the media in this new term.Three cardinal principles will guide us accessibility of information through our professional army of public sector communicators at all levels of government. Simplification of our communications to reach all our people this will include intensification of such communications by working with the media on projects that will make government communications a lot more meaningful and useful for the empowerment of our people.Finally a culture of mutual respect between the state and the media. Our constitution is one of the few that names the Freedom of the Press by name. The press in return must ask themselves a deeper question of how else they can contribute to the rebuilding of this nation and moving South Africa forward. Many people do not realise that poor information dissemination begets inequality. Over the last twenty years government has created numerous opportunities for people to get out of poverty. A number of these opportunities have passed many communities by reason poor information accessibility especially to rural communities. Government for examples a couple of years ago designated certain areas on our country as nodal points for rural development. Urban Development Nodal points will soon be upon us. Schemes for supporting up and coming farmers were put in place for communities to take advantage of research shows that half of these were either not taken up or neglected for the simple reason that their existence did not fall into the right ears. This must change as one of the basic things to accelerate the reversal of poverty in our communities. At the beginning of the previous administration billions were set aside for a jobs fund. Half of these funds were not taken up purely on the basis of scant information grasp by those who applied and simple no take up for those who did not know where to begin. With the level of unemployment amongst our youth this state of affairs is unforgivable. South Africa is well endowed with communication resources. The public broadcaster alone has 19 radio stations and 4 television stations . The question must be how effective can the public broadcaster be as a dependable partner in education and empowerment. Its slogan Total Citizen Empowerment must come to live a lot more - Similarly with government collaboration with a network of over two hundred community stations and numerous community newspaper there needs to be more that we can do as a nation to drive an information culture that can break the back of ignorance. Let me hasten to say that no one in their right mind will suggest that this will be the answer to all the problems but without an urgent change of how we level the playing field of information dissemination in this country we are headed for the deepening of inequality.We on our part as government, are readying ourselves to implement an information revolution that will place crucial information in the hand of every citizen to ensure that the ideal of freedom from poverty happens faster.Like the RDP at the dawn of our freedom in 1994, the NDP is the answer to the next thirty years carrying the hopes of many in our country whose freedom to vote in 1994 has not yet translate into economic liberation. This is the policy that seeks to move South Africa forward.ANNOUNCEMENTS Over the next hundred days, our focus of course is to establish the department in as quick a pace as it is possible so that we are able to give the necessary oversight to the numerous entities for which we are responsible. The Boards of Directors of the Entities have a responsibility to ensure that there is prudence in the transitional period and decisions made take into account the pending radical changes that may come following the public consultation.Thank you...Enquiries: Phumla Williams Cell: 083 501 0139Issued by: Department of Communications