11 August 2014Government wishes to advise the members of the media about the planned media briefings that will be convened in the week of 12 to 15 August 2014 by the various government departments.Minister Rob Davies will brief the media on the outcomes of the recent summit held in the Washington on the Africa Growth and Opportunity Act (AGOA). The Minister will also brief on his interaction with the Hollywood Films as South Africa has an interest in attracting the filming industry to view the country as a possible market for filming movies. The briefing will take place on 12 August at 12:30 in the GCIS Head Office with a video link to Cape Town.Minister Edna Molewa will brief the media on the 2013 Rhinos Census report that was presented to the last Cabinet meeting. The Minister will share with the media the proposed interventions to address the challenges of rhino poaching in the country. The briefing will take place on 12 August 2014 at 10:00am in the GCIS with a video link to Cape Town.Minister of Home Affairs will hold a media briefing to unpack the process to be followed on the application of the Special Dispensation permit for the Zimbabwean nationals. The briefing will take place on 12 August 2014 at 10:00am at the Department of Home Affairs, FSI 909 Arcadia Street, Arcadia, Pretoria.The Statistician General Mr Pali Lehohla will release the results of the Survey on Employers and Self Employed (SESE). The SESE is a household survey aimed at estimating the contribution of businesses that are not registered for VAT to the economy. The briefing will take place on 14 August 2014 at 11:00am in GCIS with a video link to Cape Town.President Jacob Zuma, together with Social Development Minister, Ms Bathabile Dlamini and some members of the Cabinet will be hosting an inter-faith prayer at the Regina Mundi Church in Soweto on 15 August. This will be a continuation of the celebration of the country s 20 Years of Freedom. Through the celebration, government also seeks to build a stronger, more dynamic and productive partnership between itself and faith-based organisations to move the country forward in line with Vision 2030.Acting GCIS CEO, Phumla Williams said, In an endeavor to ensure Government s commitment to keep its citizenry and the media updated about the implementation of the government programmes and projects, GCIS will release the schedule of media briefings on a weekly basis on Mondays. We believe that the move will further assist the media houses and the departments to plan better. Enquiries: Phumla Williams Cell: 083 501 0139Issued by Government Communication and Information System (GCIS)