7 September 2014Government wishes to advise the members of the media about the planned media briefings scheduled for the week of 08 14 September 2014. On Tuesday, 09th of September at 10:00am, the Minister of Public Works, Thulas Nxesi, will brief the media on the update of the Department of Public Works turnaround report and the state of property management. This follows Cabinet s approval of the establishment of the State Property Management Agency which will oversee the management of the government property. The briefing will be held at the IMBIZO Media Centre linked to Tshedimosetso House (GCIS), Pretoria.On the 09th of September, the Minister of Science and Technology, Naledi Pandor, and UK Minister for Africa, James Duddridge, will brief the media on a R500-million programme to fund science projects for socio-economic development in South Africa. The UK-SA Newton Fund will provide funding to joint projects in the areas of research into TB and non-communicable diseases, human capital and infrastructure development, weather forecasting and big data, among other things. The announcement will take place at 11:15am at the IMBIZO Media Centre, Cape Town.On Tuesday, 09th of September at 12:30pm, Statistician General Pali Lehohla, will hold a media briefing on the release of the of the Disability Monograph report. The briefing will take place at the Tshedimosetso House (GCIS), Pretoria with a link up to the Imbizo Centre, Cape Town. The first media briefing held by the Inter Ministerial Committee on Communication and Publicity will be held on Wednesday, 10September. The briefing will be led by Minister Jeff Radebe at the IMBIZO Media Centre in Cape Town with a link up to Tshedimosetso House (GCIS), Pretoria. The briefing will take place at 10:00am.The Department of Social Development will brief the media on the 11th of September at 10:00am, on fraudulent deductions from SASSA card holders. The media briefing will be held at the IMBIZO Media Centre, Cape Town with a link up to Tshedimosetso House (GCIS), Pretoria.Additional to these media briefings there are a number of public events that will be attended by the various Ministers. The details of the events are posted on the respective government websites.All members of the media are advised that the media briefings are subject to change. However, GCIS will continue to update the media through its advisories.Enquiries: Phumla Williams Cell: 083 501 0139Issued by Government Communication and Information System (GCIS)