18 September 2014The Thusong Service Centre week is currently underway and Deputy Minister of Communications Stella Ndabeni-Abrahams will launch the Thusong Success Stories Booklet tomorrow, 18 September 2014 at Leretlhabetse Thusong Service Centre in Moretele Municipality, North West.The Thusong Service Centre week was launched by Minister of Communications, Faith Muthambi on Sunday, 14 September 2014 at the Mamelodi Denlyn Mall, in Pretoria. The Week seeks to highlight service delivery successes achieved through Thusong Centres. The Deputy Director-General of Government Communications (GCIS) Ms Nebo Legoabe says "Mapodile Thusong Service Centre in Steelpoort, Limpopo is a flagship centre that is supported through public private partnerships. Government is pleased that the communities and businesses have utilised Mapodile Thusong Centre to change lives".Thus far the GCIS and partners have hosted 52 Thusong events and more will be held across the country until Friday, 19 September 2014. The Thusong Service Centre Success Stories Booklet shows how the centres are the hubs of life changing development initiatives. It profiles small entrepreneurs, such as mothers who have a beading project at the Colesburg Thusong Service Centre in the Northern Cape. Many of these centres are hubs for government and community partnerships in the fight against the scourge of HIV and AIDS. They change lives through the food gardens they run like the one shared in the book by Mr Tsietsie Mokoena, the Centre Manager at Siyathemba Thusong Service Centre in Mpumalanga says Deputy Director-General of GCIS, Ms Nebo Legoabe.Thusong Service Centres are one-stop centres providing integrated services and information from government and other civil society groups to communities close to where they live as part of a comprehensive strategy to better their lives. The year 2014 marks the 15th year of the Programme s existence. There are 183 Thusong Service Centres across South Africa. Locate your closest centre and download the Thusong Service Centre Success Stories Booklet at www.thusong.gov.za or by calling 012 473 0348/0331.The closing event of Thusong Service Centre Week will be led by Minister of Communications, Faith Muthambi on Friday, 19 September 2014 in Botshabelo, Free State.Enquiries: Nebo Legoabe Cell: 082 453 2874Issued by: Government Communications (GCIS)