28 September 2014Government wishes to advise the members of the media about the planned media briefings scheduled for the week of 29 September 05 October 2014. On Monday, 29th of September at 10:00am, Statistician General Pali Lehohla, will brief the media on results of the Periodic Large Sample Surveys for Mining and Trade sectors. The results will amongst others, detail the different product purchases that are made and the products that are sold. The results of the Quarterly Financial Survey of Municipalities will also be released and these will outline the combined financials of private and some public sector. The briefing will be held at Tshedimosetso House (GCIS), Pretoria with a link up to the Imbizo Media Centre, Cape Town.On the 29th of September at 9:00am, Public Works Minister, Thulas Nxesi, will lead a media briefing on anti-fraud and corruption activities at Public Works. The media briefing will deal with updates on the anti-fraud and corruption activities that the Department has embarked on, and its impact on the overall performance of the Department as reflected in the current annual report. The briefing will be held at the Tshedimosetso House (GCIS), Pretoria with a link up to the Imbizo Media Centre, Cape Town. On Tuesday, 30th of September at 11:00am, Minister of Justice and Correctional Services, Michael Masutha, will brief the media on the transfer of administrative functions and staff to the Office of Chief Justice. The briefing will be held at the Tshedimosetso House (GCIS), Pretoria with a link up to the Imbizo Media Centre, Cape Town. Additional to these media briefings there are a number of public events that will be attended by the various Ministers. The details of the events are posted on the respective government websites.All members of the media are advised that the media briefings are subject to change. However, GCIS will continue to update the media through its advisories.Enquiries: Phumla Williams Cell: 083 501 0139Issued by Government Communication and Information System (GCIS)