14 September 2014Government wishes to advise the members of the media about the planned media briefings scheduled for the week of 15 21 September 2014. On Monday, 15th of September at 10:30am, Statistician General Pali Lehohla, will brief the media on the release of the study on employment dynamics amongst the youth population group, 1994-2014 results. This report is in response to the concerns on whether South African youth are reaping the benefits of democracy. The briefing will coincide with a sod-turning ceremony of the New Stats SA building by Minister in the Presidency, Jeff Radebe. It will be held in Freedom Park, Pretoria.The Minister in the Presidency, Jeff Radebe, will lead the media briefing on behalf of the Inter Ministerial Committee on Information and Publicity on Tuesday, 16 September at 11:00am. The media briefing will be held at the Imbizo Media Centre, Cape Town with a link up to Tshedimosetso House (GCIS), Pretoria.The Post Cabinet media briefing led by the Minister in the Presidency, Jeff Radebe, will be held on Thursday, the 18th of September at 10:00am. The briefing will be held at the Tshedimosetso House (GCIS), Pretoria with a link up to the Imbizo Media Centre, Cape Town. He will brief on the decisions taken by Cabinet which will be held on 17 September.The Department of Basic Education will brief the media on the 21st of September at 10:00am, on the post Council of Education Ministers meeting. The media briefing, led by Basic Education Minister Angie Motshekga, will be held at the Tshedimosetso House (GCIS), Pretoria.Additional to these media briefings there are a number of public events that will be attended by the various Ministers. The details of the events are posted on the respective government websites.All members of the media are advised that the media briefings are subject to change. However, GCIS will continue to update the media through its advisories.Enquiries: Phumla Williams Cell: 083 501 0139Issued by Government Communication and Information System (GCIS)